README.md, before:

# signal_sqlite_md

Convert messages from a Signal SQLite database export to Markdown.

Unlike my [signal_md](https://github.com/thephm/signal_md) which requires output from `signald`, this one requires nothing beyond this Python script, configuration, and a tool to export the DB.

**DRAFT NOT FULLY TESTED!**

## Context

A big shoutout to Florian Engel whose post `[1]` saved me hours.

The SQLite DB is encrypted but it's easy to decrypt because you have the key! 

The attachments are not in the DB, they're stored in the file system in a series of folders with 2 digit Hex labels. The files have names like "`000ec9a54abe93416284f83da2f9f8d124778f22191d9422ed9829de2b22c1b7`" with no suffix but don't worry, that info is in the DB and the script takes care of adding the suffix e.g. "`.jpg`".

## References

1. [Extracting Messages from Signal Desktop](https://www.tc3.dev/posts/2021-11-02-extract-messages-from-signal/) by [Florian Engel](https://www.linkedin.com/in/engelflorian)
2. [DB Browser for SQLite](https://sqlitebrowser.org/dl/)

## Before you start

Do the following:

1. Install DB Browser for SQLite - [2]
	- *NOTE: I had to try multiple older versions before I got one that would open the file*
2. Find the **key** to your SQLite DB, see [1]
    - For me, on Windows, with user `micro` it was here: `C:\Users\micro\AppData\Roaming\Signal\config.json`
3. Find the **path** to your Signal SQLite database file
    - For me, it was here: `C:\Users\micro\AppData\Roaming\Signal\sql\db.sqlite`
4. Launch "DB Browser for SQLite"
5. Click "Open Database"
6. Choose `Raw key` from the menu to the right of the "Password" field
7. In the "Password" field, type `0x` and then paste the **key** you found in step 2
8. Right click on "messages" and click "Export as CSV file"

![](media/dbbrowser_export_messages.png)

9. Right click on "conversations" and click "Export as CSV file"
10. Find the attachments
    - Mine were under: `C:\Users\micro\AppData\Roaming\Signal\attachments.noindex`
11. Copy the attachments to the same folder (no subfolders) as the CSV file
    - *NOTE: I can improve this later, for now a shell script to copy them*

## Setting up the config files

You need to define each person you communicate with in `people.json` and groups in `groups.json`.

This is tedious the first time and needs to be updated when you add new contacts or Groups in Signal, i.e. a pain.

Someday I can automate this but for now, no pain, no gain 🙂.

### People

1. Open the `conversations.csv` file in your favorite editor
2. Look at the first 
3. If there's a `groupId` field value, that's a group
    - the `name` field will tell you the name of the group

```
""id"":""a1760c87-d3d0-40f6-9992-ac0426efcc14""
""groupId"":""FdibKUgQIZPilWQu3jbgEB+tajc3RUKuoyYNZp4bRhQ=""
""name"":""They get hooked!"
```

4. If there's no `groupID` value, it's a person
    - the `name` field will be the name of the person
    - Find the `id` and the `name` field will tell you the name of the Person

```
""id"":""a1760c87-d3d0-40f6-9992-ac0426efcc15""
""groupId"":""""
""name"":""SpongeBob"
```

5. Add the corresponding row to `groups.json` or `people.json`:
    - set group `id` to `id` from `conversations.csv`
    - set the `conversation-id`: 
        - for a group, use the `groupID` from `conversations.csv`
        - for a person use `id` from `conversations.csv`
    - set `slug`:
        - choose a one-word or hyphenated keyword for this person or group 
        - this slug must match what the frontmatter `slug` field value the person's `person.md` profile so messages can be correlated to the specific person in your notes
        - Example: `spongebob`
    - set `description` to `name` either the name from `conversations.csv` or something else e.g. "They get hooked!"
     
4. Repeat Steps 3 to 5 for every row

### Groups

1. Do the same 


## Using signal_sqlite_md

Once you have the two CSV export files and you have your `people.json`, `groups.json` configured, you're finally ready to run this tool.

The [command line options](https://github.com/thephm/message_md#command-line-options) are described in the [message_md](https://github.com/thephm/message_md) repo.

Example:

```
/mnt/c/data/github/signal_md# python3 signal_sqlite_md.py -c ../../dev-output/config -s ../../signal_sqlite/ -f messages_2023-12-25_21-36.csv -d -o ../../dev-output -m spongebob -b 2023-12-20
```

where: 

- `c`onfig settings are in `../../dev-output/config`
- `s`ource folder is `../../signal_sqlite`
- `f`ile of CSV messages is `messages_2023-12-25_21-36.csv` in the `s`ource folder
- `o`utput the Markdown files to `../../dev-output`
- `m`y slug is `spongebob`
- `b`egin the export from `2023-12-20`

## Other info

In the `messages.csv` file, the attachments are referenced in this part of the message 

```
""path"":""0b\\0b82ab19cb4cab30f5041f7705aa890833cab2c32d662c2792814e0268c90e6c""
```

Commit message:

Clarifying this deals with CSV exports not the DB directly

README.md, after:

# signal_sqlite_md

Convert messages from a Signal SQLite database export to Markdown.

**DRAFT NOT FULLY TESTED!**

Unlike my [signal_md](https://github.com/thephm/signal_md) which requires output from `signald`, this one requires nothing beyond this Python script, configuration, and a tool to export the DB.


## Disclaimer

I probably should've called it `signal_sqlite_csv_md` because the script doesn't read directly from the SQLite DB, instead it parses a CSV export from it. I tried directly accessing the DB and gave up 🤣

## Context

A big shoutout to Florian Engel whose post `[1]` saved me hours 🤗.

The SQLite DB is encrypted but it's easy to decrypt because you have the key! 

The attachments are not in the DB, they're stored in the file system in a series of folders with 2 digit Hex labels. The files have names like "`000ec9a54abe93416284f83da2f9f8d124778f22191d9422ed9829de2b22c1b7`" with no suffix but don't worry, that info is in the DB and the script takes care of adding the suffix e.g. "`.jpg`".

## References

1. [Extracting Messages from Signal Desktop](https://www.tc3.dev/posts/2021-11-02-extract-messages-from-signal/) by [Florian Engel](https://www.linkedin.com/in/engelflorian)
2. [DB Browser for SQLite](https://sqlitebrowser.org/dl/)

## Before you start

Do the following:

1. Install DB Browser for SQLite - [2]
	- *NOTE: I had to try multiple older versions before I got one that would open the file*
2. Find the **key** to your SQLite DB, see [1]
    - For me, on Windows, with user `micro` it was here: `C:\Users\micro\AppData\Roaming\Signal\config.json`
3. Find the **path** to your Signal SQLite database file
    - For me, it was here: `C:\Users\micro\AppData\Roaming\Signal\sql\db.sqlite`
4. Launch "DB Browser for SQLite"
5. Click "Open Database"
6. Choose `Raw key` from the menu to the right of the "Password" field
7. In the "Password" field, type `0x` and then paste the **key** you found in step 2
8. Right click on "messages" and click "Export as CSV file"

![](media/dbbrowser_export_messages.png)

9. Right click on "conversations" and click "Export as CSV file"
10. Find the attachments
    - Mine were under: `C:\Users\micro\AppData\Roaming\Signal\attachments.noindex`
11. Copy the attachments to the same folder (no subfolders) as the CSV file
    - *NOTE: I can improve this later, for now a shell script to copy them*

## Setting up the config files

You need to define each person you communicate with in `people.json` and groups in `groups.json`.

Samples of the files are in the `message_md` repo [here](https://github.com/thephm/message_md/tree/main/config).

This part is tedious the first time and needs to be updated when you add new contacts or Groups in Signal, i.e. a pain.

Someday I can automate this but for now, no pain, no gain 🙂. The next sections describe

### People and groups

1. Open the `conversations.csv` file in your favorite editor
2. Look at the first 
3. If there's a `groupId` field value, that's a group
    - the `name` field will tell you the name of the group

```
""id"":""a1760c87-d3d0-40f6-9992-ac0426efcc14""
""groupId"":""FdibKUgQIZPilWQu3jbgEB+tajc3RUKuoyYNZp4bRhQ=""
""name"":""They get hooked!"
```

4. If there's no `groupID` value, it's a person
    - the `name` field will be the name of the person
    - Find the `id` and the `name` field will tell you the name of the Person

```
""id"":""a1760c87-d3d0-40f6-9992-ac0426efcc15""
""groupId"":""""
""name"":""SpongeBob"
```

5. Add the corresponding row to `groups.json` or `people.json`:
    - set group `id` to `id` from `conversations.csv`
    - set the `conversation-id`: 
        - for a group, use the `groupID` from `conversations.csv`
        - for a person use `id` from `conversations.csv`
    - set `slug`:
        - choose a one-word or hyphenated keyword for this person or group 
        - this slug must match what the frontmatter `slug` field value the person's `person.md` profile so messages can be correlated to the specific person in your notes
        - Example: `spongebob`
    - set `description` to `name` either the name from `conversations.csv` or something else e.g. "They get hooked!"
     
4. Repeat Steps 3 to 5 for every row

## Using signal_sqlite_md

Once you have the two CSV export files and you have your `people.json`, `groups.json` configured, you're finally ready to run this tool.

The [command line options](https://github.com/thephm/message_md#command-line-options) are described in the [message_md](https://github.com/thephm/message_md) repo.

Example:

```
/mnt/c/data/github/signal_md# python3 signal_sqlite_md.py -c ../../dev-output/config -s ../../signal_sqlite/ -f messages_2023-12-25_21-36.csv -d -o ../../dev-output -m spongebob -b 2023-12-20
```

where: 

- `c`onfig settings are in `../../dev-output/config`
- `s`ource folder is `../../signal_sqlite`
- `f`ile of CSV messages is `messages_2023-12-25_21-36.csv` in the `s`ource folder
- `o`utput the Markdown files to `../../dev-output`
- `m`y slug is `spongebob`
- `b`egin the export from `2023-12-20`

## Other info

In the `messages.csv` file, the attachments are referenced in this part of the message 

```
""path"":""0b\\0b82ab19cb4cab30f5041f7705aa890833cab2c32d662c2792814e0268c90e6c""
```
